Okay, well, it is an interesting oeuvre you've put together thus far.
How old are you now, Joanna?
I'm 35.
35, and what, three or four novels on a collection of stories?
Uh-huh.
And do you see it as a body of work?
I suppose that it's hard to tell where I am in my career, you know.
If I, God forbid, something happens tomorrow, this is it, right?
I have five books to my name.
Or this is just the beginning of my career, you know, if I go on, plug on for 40 years.
So I don't know.
For me, the last three books I've tried to...
shake off the earlier book for one reason or another.
Let me explain this.
That's interesting, by the way.
There was a certain structure there that I found very seductive, a kind of fragmented structure.
And after I finished it, I kept trying to write something new and using that same structure and essentially writing the same book.
And I couldn't do that.
I was stuck for a while with that structure and finally had to throw it off and do something new.
When you say the same book, you are talking structure.
Yes, this narrative structure, the fragment, the fragmented narrative, skipping around through time.
So in order to try something new, I started to work on short stories and attempted to develop a more
supple narrative form.
Sometimes I would write a continuous narrative, sometimes a fragmented narrative, sometimes a chronological narrative, sometimes a narrative that's all over the board.
So that freed me up a bit.
But then after the stories, I felt like I wanted to do some sort of extended imaginative work.
was feeling frustrated by the brevity of the stories.
I kept, you know, with stories, you begin them, and then the next thing you know, they're over.
Pardon me, but did you write them with the idea of a collection in mind?
They were published around.
Yeah, I didn't.
The first four or five stories, for me, they felt like I was just biding time.
They were exercises, do you think?
Yeah, exactly.
I didn't think I was putting a collection together.
And then I started to sense a kind of thematic unity there and set out to, for the next story, set out to write stories that would be appropriate, that would fit into that governing idea.
And then, so after the stories, I began work on this novel that, for me, feels very contained.
I contained it in a setting, in a place,
and in a period of time.
You had the premise right off the bat?
I mean, you started with this... We're talking about the new novel right now.
Yeah, The Mannequin.
The Mannequin, right.
What did I start with?
Right, I mean, did you have the premise when you started?
You said you had a... I had an image of the house, really, that I wanted to set a fiction, set an entire novel within a house, or within a house in its...
surrounding landscape and not move from that.
And so that was the kind of challenge I set to myself as a writer.
I mean, did you see the Gothic element here?
No, I don't think so.
And I'm not quite sure if this word Gothic is thrown around a bit.
I know, I'm just saying what other people are saying.
Reviews have been used against me.
Even in a good review, they'll call me a Gothic writer and suddenly I'm a genre writer now.
Yeah, each was incredible this morning.
You know what I got?
I was reviewed with a couple of romance writers.
Oh, it's a gothic.
Isn't it terrible?
Yeah.
The irony here is that there's a romance writer who uses the name Joanna Scott, and people are forever missing out.
You don't need that.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
Anyway, I think just by taking...
derapidated mansion and setting it on a remote estate, suddenly you have the elements of a gothic novel.
I didn't intend that.
It just seems more of a coincidence that I...
The adjective applies here.
Now, at what point does the idea of taxidermy and fossils and all this stuff come in?
Well, I have to explain how I started the book, really, to explain that.
I was on a snowy day here in Rochester.
I happened to look out the window and saw a deer standing in the neighbor's yard.
It was a few yards down, actually.
So there was about 100 yards distance.
And this was surprising to me because we live in the city and are surrounded by some major roads.
So I didn't think... I couldn't see how the deer had traveled so far.
Anyway, I looked at... Or how it was likely to survive.
Yeah, and there was no source of natural water around.
So...
It didn't move, and it didn't move, and it didn't move.
And I went outside, and I threw a snowball at it, and it still didn't move.
And then I climbed over the fence and started pushing, and it still didn't move.
And as I got nearer, I realized it was a stuffed deer, a full-size taxiderm deer that the neighbors had set out as a lawn ornament.
You know, not any of this plastic stuff.
That's a funny story.
And then I went back into the house and was so intrigued by this idea of taxidermy that I looked it up in the image.
You mean just from that, right there?
Right, yeah.
Taxidermy, this happens, we'll get to this, but this happens, it seems, all the time to you, doesn't it?
You see something like this and you say, oh, taxidermy.
Right.
I mean, obviously.
Some people might think venison steaks or whatever.
Right, right.
It turns out that this area, Rochester, New York, was a center for taxidermy at the turn of the century.
Wow.
And there was the name Rochester, New York, in the Encyclopedia Britannica, and of course I felt very proud of that, right?
And I started to read about
This company called Ward's Science Establishment that was up here during the early years of the century was a thriving supply company for natural history museums.
It still exists, but natural history museums aren't available.
are looking elsewhere, you know, for their displays.
They're not doing these intimate dioramas.
Much to the chagrin of Stephen Jay Gould, who thinks that, I did a recent interview with him, that museums should be museums and theme parks should be theme parks.
Yeah, well, I feel that a little bit, too, as I go to these museums and see.
They're not making new dioramas.
They're doing these computer... Yeah, hands-on, whiz-bang things, making bigger bookstores, selling more T-shirts and cups, you know, that kind of stuff.
Right, right.
And I think the dioramas, the best ones are found at, say, the Field Museum or the American Museum in New York.
And they were all created by people who were associated with this ward's science establishment.
Oh, really?
Sure.
And often the elements of the diorama were put together up here.
So that was, so you found just, you talk about serendipity.
Yeah.
First of all, you see a stuffed deer in a neighbor's yard.
And then you say, gee, look up, and then lo and behold, the city that you're in was a mecca for taxidermy.
For taxidermy, exactly.
It's amazing, yeah.
And that got me thinking about the metaphor of taxidermy.
And what is the metaphor for you?
Well, I think... Stuffing things, preserving things, appearance, reality, I wonder.
Well, it has something to do with what I'm trying to do as a writer.
You take things, you take words, and you try to create some lifelike scene.
For the taxidermist, he has to take something dead and make it lifelike.
And that transformation of a corpse, essentially, or a skin, a hide,
into art seemed ripe for me as I tried to think about the nature of fiction and the nature of realism.
Also the sense that I had been tricked as I looked at the deer.
I loved that feeling, the deception of it.
I thought it was alive, but it wasn't.
When you're reading a book, you can just fall into it and think, for a second,
forgets that you're reading or even writing for a second I can forget that I'm writing I'm so absorbed by the dream of it and that's it seems to me a similar deception this happens to you obviously I mean this is part of your creative process oh yeah yeah I love it that forgetfulness that trick that hallucination really and so it's in a it's almost a
well, I don't want to say tangential metaphor in the book.
I guess it's a kind of binding metaphor, but it's one that I come to only occasionally in the book.
Do you know what I mean?
Basically, I'm concerned with the characters.
Yeah, I mean, it's not a heavy-handed metaphor, but it's there.
Here and there, I kind of step back and consider what it means to...
I try to create a fiction.
Well, we do see this in a lot of your work.
I mean, the microscope comes immediately to mind as a kind of metaphor for similar kinds of things, I think.
Remember going back to your stories?
Yeah, yeah.
I guess it's no coincidence that I began that collection with the microscope.
You certainly are looking for a strong metaphor in just about everything that you write, though.
Is that a fair statement?
I think so, yeah.
It helps me to organize my chaotic thoughts to give me a focus.
And at what point did you see this as a driving metaphor?
Did you have this idea before you had your characters?
Let's ask that.
I did have the idea before I...
Well, I had the idea, I was still thinking about this big house in the country.
I had that first.
Which is a metaphor in its own way too, isn't it?
Or a setting, yeah.
I wasn't thinking of it so much as a metaphor at that point and became more of a metaphor.
So I had my setting and then I had the deer and then the day I saw the deer I happened to go to Skidmore College to give a reading and was talking to the writers Stephen Milhauser and Catherine Davis about it and we were
laughing, I don't know if you know Stephen Miller, how you do it, but he fills his work with museums and layers upon layers of...
It sounds like I'd love it.
I'd love anything about museums.
Oh, you would.
I mean, look at my book.
I mean, it's just... Oh, of course you would.
I mean, you're a book tour, it occurs to me.
You probably already know that.
No, that's not the point.
I mean, it's just I am fascinated by museums and collections of things.
Anyway... How do you spell his name, Milhouse?
Not like Nixon.
Pardon me?
How do you spell Milhouse?
Milhauser.
Oh, I'm sorry, Milhauser.
Yeah.
How do you spell it?
M-I-L-L-H-U-S-E-R.
Okay, good.
I'll try to check it out.
Go ahead.
Actually, I think there's only one L in it.
Okay, well, I'll find it.
It's close enough.
So, he leaned back and said, imagine, we were talking about taxidermy and laughing, thinking about writing a book about taxidermy or some mad taxidermist, and he said,
imagine 50 pages on stuffing an owl.
And I said, well, let's do it.
Let's all write it.
So we all vowed to go off and write a book about stuffing owls.
And I seem to be the only one.
I'm waiting.
They probably forgot about it when I got home.
So at that point, I had my house.
I had my...
And I had my owl.
And you do start with your owl.
Yeah, yeah.
You almost give her just a little too many human thoughts, though.
Yeah.
Well, it was my first animal incarnation.
I'm teasing here, but I mean, how else can you verbalize it, you know?
Well, you can without doing that.
I've played with animal stories a little bit since then.
I'm kind of intrigued by that.
The possibilities.
But I mean, people who think they don't think are fools.
Yeah, yeah.
The expressiveness of an animal.
It's very mysterious.
I mean, we've got a Labrador retriever.
You can't tell me that she's not happy when she's happy.
Yeah, and there's that book, A Hidden Life of Dogs.
Yeah, that's right.
Is that the new one now?
There's another one now about the psychology of dogs.
It's crazy.
Oh, no, I don't know.
Go ahead.
I'm sorry.
I keep interrupting.
Anyway, so at that point, once I had the house, taxidermy, and the owl, I could start writing and began that scene with the owl and brought it to the landscape where it's going to set the fiction and then let it go.
And then at what point do the voices start to resonate?
Well, I knew that in a big house I had to throw it with servants.
the first half of the century, domestic service was one of the main sources of employment.
And so this house, naturally, would have to have servants to maintain it.
And so the servants started to acquire voices, as I wrote on in the novel.
But you do have, I've read, I read there was some piece about you, I thought it was pretty good, actually, about, you know, where these voices, and of course there is a striking variety of voices in your work.
In fact, somebody has compared you with Poe and Hawthorne.
Have you seen that?
Yeah.
And Isaac Dennison as well.
That was the Globe piece, I think.
One review that turned out to be a good review, but it was a tiny thing, that I,
compliments our book reviewers' bread and butter.
We accept them and ignore them.
And then the reviewer went on to say, Joanna Scott has been compared to Nathaniel Hawthorne.
And the best line was, Joanna who?
Joanna Scott has been compared to Hawthorne.
Joanna who?
That's cute.
Well, I mean, that is kind of heady.
And you're not asking for the comparison either.
I know, I know.
I kind of like that, actually.
Joanna who?
That sort of sums up the response to the song.
Mishiko gave you a wonderful review last year on the stories.
Yeah, she did the last two books.
Did she do this book too?
No, no.
I don't know.
Did she do three books in a row?
Sure.
They seem to do...
They do seem to keep coming back.
I mean, it seems to me they have their favorites, but you don't want Chris to do it.
He's so damn lazy.
Oh, I know.
He did my first book.
Indifferently, right?
I'll bet.
I've never seen such a wishy-washy reviewer.
I mean, he starts with, well, it's this and that.
And then he winds up saying it's wonderful.
I mean, well, make up your mind.
Is this in your book?
No, he didn't.
Allens predicted he wouldn't because it was too long.
He said he doesn't read that much anymore.
I thought he would because his father is in the, Helmut Lehmannhoft is, you know, was a major, major bibliographer and I've got his, about three of his books in the bibliography.
Oh, huh.
It would have been appropriate, yeah.
Not that that meant that that wouldn't have been any kind of a conflict, but I just thought that the interest would be there, at least reading part of it.
But it got totally ignored in the daily times.
Yeah, well, I haven't even had a Sunday talk to you yet.
Yeah, what was your pub date?
Oh, February, beginning of February.
You know, it's early yet.
It's early yet.
Yeah.
We know there's one scheduled.
For the TBR?
Yeah, which means, you know, it's probably another attack.
Well, when is it scheduled?
We don't know.
What can you say?
How do you know it's scheduled?
Alan somehow found out, and Ruth did.
Ruth's wonderful.
She's great, yeah.
She's outstanding.
We've been working on my book now since July, you know.
And, of course, we talk about
authors like this so it's two hats we change hats yeah and talk about this i'm sorry we got off the track there it seems to me you do a lot of research though um you don't seem to be intimidated by taking on our keen subjects you're right you're right i'm not intimidated and i'm whenever i finish a book i kind of look at it and say wow i can't believe i i took on something that's strange and nobody called you on it either right exactly i'm always ready for that and in fact
No one has.
With Egon Shira, I seem to get away with... No one called me on it, as you said.
I seem to fool them.
I don't want to put that into it.
No, I won't worry about it.
In a way, I'm amazed at my...
boldness with that book in particular that I took on this artist and this culture.
An actual figure.
Yeah, I didn't know.
And then with the stories, I had to do, my research was limited.
I always feel like I'm never doing enough research, you know?
I'm never, I'm not exactly an historical novelist.
I'm not trying to be authentic exactly.
And so I always feel guilty.
When I take on these historical subjects or these scientific subjects, I feel that I'm no expert here.
But that's part of my impulse, too, to take on a subject that is somehow reserved for experts, reserved for professionals, and to make it my own.
And with this one, taking on the subject of natural history and taxidermy, a funny thing happened just a few days ago.
I was giving a signing here in town at Borders.
And there was a woman in the crowd who came up to me, waited until everybody else had gone, and she came up to me afterwards and introduced herself as the daughter of the local taxidermist in town.
And this can go either way, when they come up, right?
No, I was scared he was going to sue me, because I had visited this man, and without telling him what I was doing, I had asked him lots of questions, and he had shown me around his studio, and I had used a lot of the information that he gave me in the book.
I don't see anything wrong with that.
No, no, but then I had this character, Bajo, who's...
Kind of like the guy that showed you.
Not exactly.
Has some of the same aesthetic values.
And I waited with bated breath there for her to...
give me a summons or something.
But instead she said, oh, my family loves the book.
And they have a saying now in the family, whenever anybody wants to get out of the house, they say they're going over to Bajos.
That's cute.
So luckily I got away with it.
But when you do write about a historical figure, do you feel any kind of responsibility to the record?
I feel a mixed responsibility.
I have to say I feel ambivalence.
Because I don't want to trust history that much.
I don't want to believe that history is completely honest.
And so that makes me feel that as a fiction writer, I can take bits of it and mix it with... I imagine...
bits, mix it with fiction, mix history with fiction and change it without being, I don't know, I don't feel that I'm being transgressive exactly.
I just feel that I'm skeptical, I suppose, of historical narrative.
As much as I love it, I want to blend, I want to blend fiction and history rather than
simply recreate history with some sort of costume drama fiction.
But it's really, you use it more or less to kind of stir the muse in any case.
I mean, the imagination is the principal element, I gather.
Yeah, it is.
And from the start, people have said, oh, you always, well, when are you going to write about yourself, your own experiences?
Yeah, you haven't done that, have you?
Well, I feel like I always am, too.
But it's hidden, and that's the way I prefer it.
I prefer to be hidden.
Eventually, once I'm confident enough, I'm going to start publishing anonymously, I think.
Maybe with the next book.
You think you do that?
Doris Lessing did that.
Yeah, yeah.
But when she did it, she was Doris Lessing, too.
Right, right, exactly.
But I...
I... What's the thing now?
Um...
Well, I guess you hit the hidden self in the fiction, I guess.
So where could people who know you find you in your work?
Well, that's a secret.
Let me tell you, when I do these, I'm always looking for my lead.
I'm always looking for my kicker.
You just gave me my kicker.
Oh, good.
Okay.
Well, they can find me everywhere and nowhere.
That's great.
That's wonderful.
This isn't hard, I told you.
Okay.
Good talk if you want.
I'm thinking here.
I'll let you lead me.
You're a Connecticut woman, I gather?
From where?
from uh uh darien okay i have two newspapers in connecticut that's why i mentioned it okay where where uh new london takes me every week and manchester takes me which is nice because it's where yukon is and i i really i'm in a lot of university towns a lot of southern towns i just uh crazily i got roanoke yesterday which is in the woods you know in the mountains
But I'm in Charlottesville every week and I'm in Knoxville and Gainesville and Eugene, Oregon and Salt Lake City and Boston.
So, you know, we're universities, which is nice.
Yeah.
Where people read what you want hopes.
And I think that, you know, you're the kind of...
author, a literary author.
Right.
I've got a couple of papers down in New Jersey that I mentioned to you.
Who is the person down in New Jersey again?
A woman by the name of Karen Fisk, F-I-S-K, and she apparently said she, I don't know, she didn't suggest that she knows you well, but she certainly knows your work.
Right, but the name's familiar.
And quite anxious to get this piece, which is nice.
Yeah.
And, you know, the good news is I'm red where people read books.
That's how I go about selling the column.
I mean, I find communities where they are.
There's a demonstrated market for books.
If I look at the ABA sales figures and where the books sell them.
Oh, that's interesting.
You know what Good Paper is, that news day?
There's Sunday book sections.
Yeah, well, they've got a full-time staff.
Sometimes I can... It's a fine line.
I mean, I can't go to a place like the Globe or the... I see.
Because they've got three people, you know.
Right.
So what I'm going to do is find these nice, like I'm in Toledo every week, I'm in Columbus, which is really, you know, Ohio State, you know.
Austin, which is supposedly the best book city in America, Austin, Texas.
They sell more per capita, per household, and per bookstore down there.
But all it is is a state capital in the University of Texas, so you would expect that.
Anyway, we don't need to go in and tell all that.
So what are you working on now?
I'm working on stories again, partly because I have a small child who only gives me little pockets of time.
So I've actually moved up from the 1920s to the 1930s, and I'm slowly approaching.
Is it kind of a chronological thing?
Has it been?
Well, I did.
In my last book of stories, I...
arranged them chronologically and ended with something a story set in the 70s so that's as close as i've gotten really to a contemporary that is interesting for a woman 35 um and i could see why people would ask you you haven't written about yourself or you know by extension your your time yeah oh i know i'm i'm i find this time
Utterly baffling.
And so as long as there's written material to organize my thoughts about the past, that helps me to create a fiction.
And I have tried to write a more contemporary piece.
It doesn't work?
I get lost.
Well, what is it?
What do you suppose makes that happen?
Well, there just seems to be...
So much, so much, I guess, so much.
I look out the window.
I pick up a newspaper.
I feel like I'm inundated with possibilities.
Well, when I'm writing out of history, those possibilities are limited.
Perhaps it's the visual element of contemporary life.
There's just so much to see, and I look and see these things.
these things and I don't know the names of them.
I look across the neighbor's house and I don't know the name of the kind of roofing they have.
I don't know the name of the color of the brick or something.
And when I'm dealing with history, those names, those words are available or more readily available.
Do you see what I'm saying?
Yeah, I do.
But you take it upon yourself to find these things out, I gather.
Yeah, so that's where the research comes in.
I mean, did you see yourself when you started this business as a fiction writer as a researcher as well?
No, no, I didn't.
I didn't.
It was an experience I had with the first novel I wrote when the narrator is an old fisherman.
And I knew nothing about fishing.
and started to read not just fishing guides, but archaic fishing guides, these angling books written in the late 19th century.
And they were so rich, so lovely.
The language was just amazing in them that I thought, wow, here's a story in itself.
The love of fishing is expressed in the language that was archaic,
It just really intrigued me, and that's when I started to recognize, for me, the value of research.
What was the attraction to fishing?
I...
No attraction.
It was arbitrary.
I took it on.
I just decided I wanted something that I didn't do.
I don't fish.
But I mean, that's basically the story of almost all of your books, isn't it?
Yeah, I guess it is.
Yeah.
Yeah, I want something that I don't... It's not familiar.
Nothing seems to be familiar to you.
Yeah, yeah.
Superficially, at least.
Yeah.
And we... Well, we have the hidden elements.
I'm writing intimately.
Yeah.
And this frustrates me, too, because...
People, if I'm writing in the voice of a male protagonist, or if I'm writing out of a moment from the past, people automatically assume that there's some kind of detachment between me and my subject.
And I don't feel that... I'm baffled by that criticism.
Detachment.
I don't know what that means.
Because I feel intimately the emotions of these characters as I'm writing...
I don't know.
Is it because I'm crossing gender lines, crossing out of the contemporary world into the past?
I don't understand that.
It's a frustrating criticism and one that I've had over and over.
I think it's great that both you and your husband teach in Rochester.
It's wonderful that I can get.
It's a great gig.
We're both on leave this year, too, so we're kicking around the house a lot.
It's fun.
I work at home, which I've been doing now for six years, and it's heaven, I must say.
I wish I'd started it earlier.
Yeah.
My wife works here, too, but we have to keep it different parts of the different ends of the house.
We can't afford it the way Michael Holroyd and Margaret Drabble, they have separate houses.
Oh, really?
It's from London, you know.
And then they get together at night.